.. This file is included under 'format_orig.rst' and should use '~~' or lower as the top header level.

.. _array-dso:

DSO Original Data Format
------------------------

The Denmark Strait Overflow (DSO) monitoring provides continuous time series of dense water overflow transport through Denmark Strait,
a critical component of the Atlantic meridional overturning circulation.

DSO_transport_hourly_1996_2021.nc
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The file called 'DSO_transport_hourly_1996_2021.nc' is freely available from here: 
https://icdc.cen.uni-hamburg.de/thredds/catalog/ftpthredds/dso_transport/catalog.html

The dense overflows across the Greenland-Iceland-Scotland ridge constitute the most important contribution to the lower limb 
of the Atlantic Meridional Overturning Circulation. Among those, the Denmark Strait carries with about half of the total the 
largest fraction of the transport. Since 1996, the outflow of DSOW has nearly constantly be monitored with moored instruments. 
The University Hamburg maintains an ADCP mooring at the Denmark Strait sill up to date.

Volume transports of the overflow through Denmark Strait are captured by the two moored acoustic current profilers and hydrographic sensors
at the DS1 and DS2 locations. DS1 is maintained by Hafrannsóknastofnun Marine and Freshwater Research Institute (MFRI), Iceland, 
and DS2 is maintained by Universität of Hamburg. Processing of the data is described by Jochumsen et. al (2017).

This dataset contains hourly time series of Denmark Strait overflow transport from 1996 to 2021 and contains an integrated quantity. 
It is processed data from two upward looking ADCP, but has various gaps due to missing instruments.
The file format is NetCDF. 

For questions reach out to: 
Armin Köhl
CEN / University of Hamburg
E-Mail: armin.koehl (at) uni-hamburg.de

Remon Sadikni
ICDC / CEN / University of Hamburg
E-Mail: remon.sadikni@uni-hamburg.de<br />

Please cite the data as follows:

Jochumsen, K., M. Moritz, N. Nunes, D. Quadfasel, K. M. Larsen, B. Hansen, H. Valdimarsson and S. Jonsson (2017):
Revised transport estimates of the Denmark Strait Overflow, Journal of Geophysical Research J. Geophys. Res., 122, 3434–3450, doi:10.1002/2017JC012803.

and with the following acknowledgments:

The timeseries was generated by Institution of Oceanography Hamburg and Hafrannsóknastofnun / Marine and Freshwater Research Institute
(Reykjavik, Iceland). They were supported through funding from the NACLIM, EU-FP7, grant agr. n.308299, until 2016, and from RACE II 
(Förderkennzeichen 03F0729B, until 2018), RACE-Synthese (Förderkennzeichen 03F0825B, until 2020) German Federal Ministry for Education 
and Research (BMBF). Nordic WOCE, VEINS, MOEN (contract no. EVK2-CT-2002-00141), ASOF-W (contract no. EVK2-CT-2002-00149), NAClim 
(grant agr. nr. 308299) THOR (grant agr. nr. 212643), AtlantOS, Blue Action. Collaborative Research Centre TRR 181 "Energy Transfers in 
Atmosphere and Ocean" funded by the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft (DFG, German Research Foundation) - Project number 274762653.
Thanks to ICDC, CEN, University of Hamburg for data support.

The data was published under the Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License (CC-BY-4.0).


.. list-table:: Variables (preliminary)
   :widths: 12 22 14 10 35
   :header-rows: 1

   * - Name
     - Dimensions
     - Shape
     - Units
     - Description
   * - ``TIME``
     - ``TIME``
     - (221514,)
     - datetime
     - Time coordinate (hourly)
   * - ``DSO``
     - ``TIME``, ``DEPTH``
     - (221514,1)
     - Sv
     - Denmark Strait overflow volume transport

.. todo::
   - Complete data format specifications
   - Add detailed variable descriptions
   - Document overflow monitoring methodology
   - Add references to Hamburg/Reykjavik collaboration
   - Document quality control procedures
   - Add information about mooring array configuration